Add `3DTILES_bounding_volume_S2` specification (#532)
CesiumGS/3d-tiles: extensions/3DTILES_bounding_volume_S2/README.md

<!-- omit in toc -->
# 3DTILES_bounding_volume_S2

<!-- omit in toc -->

> ## Contributors

Author: Update contributors after reviewing

- Sam Suhag, Cesium
- Sean Lilley, Cesium
- Peter Gagliardi, Cesium

<!-- omit in toc -->
## Status

Draft

<!-- omit in toc -->

> ## Dependencies

Author: @lilleyse should this list the S2 specification as a dependency? or is it enough to mention it in the overview?

Reviewer: I think the S2 <-> implicit connection should be mentioned upfront here. It could look similar to how EXT_mesh_features does that:

https://github.com/CesiumGS/glTF/tree/3d-tiles-next/extensions/2.0/Vendor/EXT_mesh_features#dependencies

Reviewer: I think mentioning S2 in the overview is fine

Written against 3D Tiles 1.0. Optionally, this extension may be used with [3DTILES_implicit_tiling](../3DTILES_implicit_tiling). 

<!-- omit in toc -->
## Optional vs. Required

This extension is required, meaning it must be placed in both the `extensionsUsed` and `extensionsRequired` lists in the tileset JSON.

<!-- omit in toc -->
## Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Hierarchy](#hierarchy)
- [Cell IDs](#cell-ids)
- [Tokens](#tokens)
- [Bounding Volume](#bounding-volume)
- [Implicit Subdivision](#implicit-subdivision)
  - [Availability](#availability)
- [Property Reference](#property-reference)
- [JSON Schema](#json-schema)
- [Implementation Examples](#implementation-examples)

## Overview

> S2 is a geometry library that defines a framework for decomposing the unit sphere into a hierarchy of cells. A cell is a quadrilateral bounded by four geodesics. The S2 cell hierarchy has 6 root cells, that are obtained by projecting the six faces of a cube onto the unit sphere.

Author: ```suggestion
[S2](https://s2geometry.io/) is a geometry library that defines a framework for decomposing the unit sphere into a hierarchy of cells. A cell is a quadrilateral bounded by four geodesics. The S2 cell hierarchy has 6 root cells, that are obtained by projecting the six faces of a cube onto the unit sphere.
```

## Hierarchy

The cell hierarchy of S2 is rooted in the 6 faces of a cube, which are projected onto the unit sphere. In S2, each face of the unit cube can be subdivided into 30 levels using a quadtree structure, in which each cell on the grid subdivides into 4 equal cells at the subsequent level.

|Level 0|Level 1|
|:-:|:-:|
| ![Plane - Level 0](figures/plane_parent.png) S2 cell (`"1"`) on the Earth cube| ![Plane - Level 1](figures/plane_children.png) Children of S2 cell (`"1"`) on the Earth cube |
| ![Ellipsoid - Level 0](figures/ellipsoid_parent.png)  S2 cell (`"1"`) on the WGS84 ellipsoid| ![Ellipsoid - Level 1](figures/ellipsoid_children.png) Children of S2 cell (`"1"`) on the WGS84 ellipsoid|

The S2 library uses a modified Hilbert curve to provide a one dimensional ordering of cells on the S2 Earth cube. This provides each cell, from level 1 to level 30, with a unique 64-bit identifier. Using S2 cell IDs, centimeter scale areas be uniquely identified.

| S2 Curve on Earth cube |  S2 Curve on WGS84 ellipsoid |
|:-:|:-:|
| ![Math](figures/plane.png)  | ![Math](figures/ellipsoid.png)  |

## Cell IDs

> The 64-bit S2 cell ID is constructed as follows:

Author: @sanjeetsuhag is there something I can link to where S2 cell IDs are officially defined?

Reviewer 2: The "official" explainer would be this: https://s2geometry.io/devguide/s2cell_hierarchy

3. Set the bit following the last child to `1`.
4. Set the remaining bits to `0`.

For example:

```
0011000000000...000   Root cell 2
0010110000000...000   2nd child of root cell 2
0010111100000...000   3rd child of 2nd child of root cell 2
0010111001000...000   1st child of 3rd child of 2nd child of root cell 2
```

In their decimal forms, the cell IDs above are represented as follows:

```
3458764513820540928   Root cell 2
3170534137668829184   2nd child of root cell 2
3386706919782612992   3rd child of 2nd child of root cell 2
3368692521273131008   1st child of 3rd child of 2nd child of root cell 2
```

## Tokens

To provide a more concise representation of the cell ID, as well as to provide a better indication of the level of the cell, we can use the hexadecimal form of the cell ID and remove any trailing zeros to obtain the cell's token.

For the cell IDs in the example above, the tokens are:

```
3     Root cell 2
2c    2nd child of root cell 2
2f    3rd child of 2nd child of root cell 2
2ec   1st child of 3rd child of 2nd child of root cell 2
```

## Bounding Volume

> An S2 cell describes 4 positions on the surface of the WGS84 ellipsoid. The `minimumHeight` and `maximumHeight`, provided in meters, describe the minimum and maximum heights above (or below) each corner position of the cell respectively. A tile's [`transform`](../../specification#tile-transforms) property will be ignored when this extension is used for describing a tile's `boundingVolume`. Tiles using this extension must maintain [spatial coherence](../../specification/README.md#bounding-volume-spatial-coherence). This extension may be applied to the [`tile.boundingVolume`](../../specification/schema/tile.schema.json) or the [`content.boundingVolume`](../../specification/schema/content.schema.json) objects.

Author: @sanjeetsuhag is this rewording accurate? The top surface of an S2 bounding cell has a constant height not just at the corners but even in the interior, right?

```suggestion
An S2 cell describes 4 positions on the surface of the WGS84 ellipsoid, indicating the horizontal position of the corners of the bounding volume. The `minimumHeight` and `maximumHeight`, provided in meters, describe the heights of the bottom and top surface of the bounding volume, respectively. A tile's [`transform`](../../specification#tile-transforms) property will be ignored when this extension is used for describing a tile's `boundingVolume`. Tiles using this extension must maintain [spatial coherence](../../specification/README.md#bounding-volume-spatial-coherence). This extension may be applied to the [`tile.boundingVolume`](../../specification/schema/tile.schema.json) or the [`content.boundingVolume`](../../specification/schema/content.schema.json) objects.
```

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if the term "horizontal" is helping or hurting here. I think the concept we want to convey here is that of "extrusion", and not "construction".

Author: I tried rewording this a different way, describing it as extrusion

Reviewer 2: Latest description looks good to me.

                      "minimumHeight": 0,
                      "maximumHeight": 125000
                    }
                  }
                },
                "refine": "REPLACE",
                "geometricError": 125000
              }
            ]
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Implicit Subdivision

When used with [`3DTILES_implicit_tiling`](../3DTILES_implicit_tiling), a `QUADTREE` subdivision scheme will follow the rules for subdivision as defined by the S2 cell hierarchy. When an `OCTREE` subdivision scheme is used, the split in the vertical dimension occurs at the midpoint of the `minimumHeight` and `maximumHeight` of the parent tile.

| Cell  | Quadtree Subdivision | Octree Subdivision |
|---|---|---|
| ![Parent Cell](figures/parent.png)  | ![Quadtree Cells](figures/quadtree.png)  | ![Octree Cells](figures/octree.png)  |

To ensure continuity of the Hilbert curve, the faces of the cube are rotated as shown in the diagram below. This must be carefully considered when interpreting the tile coordinates in implicit tiling, since the traversal order in the odd-numbered faces is the mirror of the order in even numbered faces.

```

>                   ^---->  <----^

Author: @javagl I seem to recall you had a nicer diagram for this? could you export that so I can include it here?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I had created that because I thought that it might go into the overview, but that would be a bit too detailed for that section.

![3d-tiles-s2-faces](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5597569/139741021-35f64b5e-8670-42a9-afb4-5825c94bd32a.png)

The SVG source, for reference: [3d-tiles-s2-faces.zip](https://github.com/CesiumGS/3d-tiles/files/7456090/3d-tiles-s2-faces.zip)

(An aside: I *think* that GitHub can display SVGs directly, with some quirks. But for "portability", PNG is probably preferable...)

                  | 4  |    5  |
                  |    |       |
                  x    V  ----->

          ^---->  <----^
          | 2  |    3  |
          |    |       |
          x    V  ----->

  ^---->  <----^
  | 0  |    1  |
  |    |       |
  x    v  ----->
```

### Availability

When using this extension with `3DTILES_implicit_tiling`, the availability bitstreams must be indexed in Morton order, as illustrated by the following diagram:

> ![Availability](figures/availability.jpg)

Author: It would be better if this diagram had the fractal curves overlaid for comparison like we did in `3DTILES_implicit_tiling`. I have a script for the Morton curve, but I'd have to adapt it for Hilbert curves too.

              "token": "5",
              "minimumHeight": 0,
              "maximumHeight": 1000000
            }
          }
        },
        "refine": "REPLACE",
        "geometricError": 5000,
      },
      {
        "boundingVolume": {
          "extensions": {
            "3DTILES_bounding_volume_S2": {
              "token": "7",
              "minimumHeight": 0,
              "maximumHeight": 1000000
            }
          }
        },
        "refine": "REPLACE",
        "geometricError": 5000,
      },
      {
        "boundingVolume": {
          "extensions": {
            "3DTILES_bounding_volume_S2": {
              "token": "9",
              "minimumHeight": 0,
              "maximumHeight": 1000000
            }
          }
        },
        "refine": "REPLACE",
        "geometricError": 5000,
      },
      {
        "boundingVolume": {
          "extensions": {
            "3DTILES_bounding_volume_S2": {
              "token": "b",
              "minimumHeight": 0,
              "maximumHeight": 1000000
            }
          }
        },
        "refine": "REPLACE",
        "geometricError": 5000,
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> ## Property Reference

Author: For consistency, remove the generated reference and just link to the schema.
